Hi there.
This is the De La Rue.
And welcome back.
Web applications can be developed using different kinds of technologies like the Java E, ASP.NET,
Ruby on Rails, PHP and so on and so forth.
Our interest is in using the Java stack that is Java based technologies.
So in this lecture we will discuss a bit on Java EE and we will also briefly discuss about web servers
and servlet containers.
Java family includes multiple specifications for building different types of applications.
For instance, we know that the Java Sea specification defines the core Java language as well as the
Java and Java as a specification just by itself can be used for building desktop Java applications,
standalone Java applications.
And to define the Code Java language, it uses the Java language specification or G+ in short, and
for JVM it uses the Java virtual machine specification.
So essentially Java SE specification implies these two specifications.
And keep in mind that a specification is simply a document which is written in plain English language.
And we have implementations such as the Oracle's JDK and Free and Open JDK, which implement Gels and
JVM specification.
And as I said earlier, using Just Java SE alone, we can build standalone desktop Java applications.
But if we want to build web applications, we need Java EE.
And for that we have the Java E specification, which is a collection of specifications that extend
the Java Sea specification.
So Java EE extends Java SE.
And these specifications define how Web applications, Web services and other kinds of enterprise software
would work.
And one of the important Java EE specifications is the servlet specification.
It defines servlet and how they work as part of a web application.
Servlet is a key Java EE technology for serving web content and we will soon look at servlet.
Similarly, there are also other specifications like the IGB Specification Java Persistence API specification
jacks are a specification which is a web services related specification and so on and so forth.
So those are specifications and these are some implementations of Java EE specifications.
Glass Fish is the Oracle implementation of Java EE specification.
An Apache Tomcat is a partial implementation.
That is, it implements only a subset of the Java collection of specifications like the Servlet and
JSP specifications.
And we will soon install Apache Tomcat to.
Know that in 2017 Java E specification was officially taken over by the Eclipse Foundation from Oracle.
On the Java Sea, you can build large scale web applications like e-commerce websites, which can have
millions of users accessing them every single day.
And let's also not forget Java Me, which is the Java Micro edition, which is used for building applications
for resource constrained devices.
Now, since we are interested in Java E, let's just focus on that.
As of today.
Java eight is the latest version and these are all the different specifications that fall under Java
EE.
Only some of the important specifications are shown here and at the very end we have the Java Sea as
Java E, as we just mentioned, is an extension of Java SE.
Now we are somewhat familiar with web programming.
You must have heard of application server, web server and servlet container, and probably you may
even be confused about the differences between them.
So let's get a clarity on that.
So what we have here are specifications and something should implement them, just like the way JDK
and Jari implement the Java specification.
And an application server is something that would implement the entire Java specification, which would
be all of these specifications.
As mentioned earlier, Glass Fish implements Java EE.
So it is an application server and it is also open source and is provided by Oracle.
It is the reference implementation of Java EE specifications, just like the way they have the JDK and
Jerry, which are also reference implementations of Java SE specification and among other application
servers, we have the IBM's WebSphere and also Oracle's WebLogic.
So an application server comes with technologies that would implement these different specifications.
And we as developers build our applications using those technologies.
However, often web applications do not need all of the technologies that we see here.
For instance, many web applications are built using just technologies like sublets and ISPs and do
not need technologies like Aegis, where BJB stands for Enterprise Java Beans.
So an application server would be an overkill for such web applications, which are considered lightweight.
Often only these specifications would suffice for building such lightweight web applications.
And for that we need something called a servlet container which would implement these specifications,
which are a subset of the Java EE specifications.
And the servlet container is also often referred to as a web container or a servlet engine.
An example servlet container is Apache Tomcat, which is open source and is written in Java.
Another example of a servlet container is Jetty.
A symbolic container, as the name implies, is a container for sublets that is sublets are deployed
in a sublet container.
And later we will look at how that can be done.
And a sublet is simply a Java class and we will soon look at sublets and sublets are mainly used for
generating dynamic web pages and the dynamic web page is something that is constructed dynamically.
That is it is constructed on the fly and typically it would include content which is fetched from the
database.
Since we are saying a sublet is generating web pages, it means it can also include HTML tags.
So we would use servlet containers when we want to build really lightweight web applications.
And we have application servers for building much more complex web applications where we would need
technologies like Aegis.
However, sometimes we build applications that fall somewhere in between.
That is, we do not need the entire Java specifications, but we also need something more than what
a servlet container can offer.
And for that we have these subset of specifications and they are collectively referred to as Java EE
Web Profile.
JSF, JPA and CDI are some important specifications here, and it also includes the specifications that
is servlet container implements like the Servlet and JSP specifications.
An implementation for Java e web profile is the Apache Dom E, which is also pronounced as Apache Tommey
and it is a wrapper around vanilla Apache Tomcat, which is a servlet container.
For now we are only interested in servlet container and let's just focus only on that.
And we have this.
So we have a browser which is the client and the servlet container that has all the solids now.
So the container is specific to servlet, but in order to receive HTTP requests from the browser and
respond back with HTTP response, we also need something called a web server.
Not that a web server is not the same as application server, which we discussed earlier.
An example web server is the Apache HTTP server.
We said that a servlet container would serve dynamic content via servers, but a web server is typically
configured to serve only static web pages.
And the static web page is a web page that has static content that is, the entire content in the web
page is hardcoded.
So content doesn't come from sources like databases, which is what is typically the case for dynamic
web pages.
A subnet container like Tomcat can also serve static content, but its main purpose is to host servlet
and JSP.
JSP stands for Java Server Pages.
So with this sort of setup that we see here, when the web server receives a request for a static web
page, then the web server itself can serve the webpage.
But if the request was for a sublet.
Then the web server hands the request to servlet container under servlet.
Container calls the servlet, which generates the dynamic response which is then relayed back to the
client by the intermediary web server.
So a web server essentially listens for HTTP calls coming from the browser and can also respond back.
Now, having said that, a servlet container like Apache Tomcat can also act like a web server.
That is, we would have something like this.
Tomcat has a separate module called Coyote, which acts as a web server.
In fact, when we start TomKat, the web server is on by default and as it should, it would be listening
for incoming HTTP calls.
Now, this basic configuration is definitely good enough to build some large scale websites.
Of course, we would also need some adequate hardware too.
Now, if your experiments show that the performance is not good enough with this configuration, then
you can think of adding Apache to HTTP web server, which it seems can serve the static content faster
than Tomcat and also provide some additional performance benefits.
Adding more hardware, more database instances and things like that will be further helpful in improving
the performance.
So that's about it for now.
We now have an idea about the Java EE specification, which is a collection of a long list of specifications
and an application server implements them.
But many lightweight web applications can be built using just a subset of those specifications.
And for that, we can use it servlet container like Tomcat, which can also act as a web server.
We also have the Java EE Web profile, which adds a few more specifications on top of what servlet container
implements.
That's it for now and thank you.